---
title:  "Research"
layout: archive
permalink: /_pages/Research/
---

### Unraveling the time-varying nature of responses to disturbances

Extreme weather events such as heatwaves and storms are increasing in frequency and magnitude under global change. Understanding the effects of such **pulse disturbances** requires rigorous theory that accommodates changes in the ecological context of a given community. Yet, the typical theoretical recipe to study responses of populations to disturbances assumes that the system is at an equilibrium with static species interactions. In my work, I have been extending this theory to **non-equilibrium** population fluctuations, such as cyclic and chaotic dynamics, which occur in many ecological communities. We have shown that, because of time-varying species interactions, several properties of how communities and their species respond to perturbations can also change over time. Specifically, we have shown that the **sensitivity** of species abundances to pulse disturbances depends on the timing of the disturbance ([Medeiros *et al* 2023 *Ecology Letters*](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ele.14131)). Thus, any given species can be more or less sensitive depending on the ecological context of the community.

We have also proposed a theoretical framework to scale up from the sensitivity of individual species ([Medeiros *et al* 2023 *Ecology Letters*](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ele.14131)) to whole-community sensitivity ([Cenci *et al* 2020 *J. R. Soc. Interface*](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2019.0627)) by taking into account how species respond in a correlated way to pulse disturbances ([Medeiros *et al* 2023 *Ecology*](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ecy.4115)). By connecting metrics of responses to disturbance at the species and the community levels, this framework allowed us to bridge different levels of biological organization under non-equilibrium population dynamics. An important strength of these metrics of responses to perturbations is that they can be inferred directly from population time-series data using **nonparametric** statistical inference tools. This has allowed us to apply our approaches and obtain insights for several systems, from rocky intertidal to plankton communities.

### Forecasting shifts in community composition and dynamics under disturbances

In addition to extreme weather events, human activities are causing persistent disruptions such as warming and pollution. Ecology has a long history of studying such **press disturbances** and their impacts, which include shifts in the composition or dynamical regime of communities. One important impact concerns sudden shifts to **alternative dynamical regimes** (e.g., alternative stable states). Although several time-series indicators, such as variance and autocorrelation, can warn about an upcoming shift, they provide no information on post-shift dynamics. We have developed a data-driven approach that combines machine learning tools with information on the press disturbance driver to characterize how populations will fluctuate after a regime shift ([Medeiros *et al* 2024 *bioRxiv*](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.08.07.607005v1)). By applying this approach to an experimental microbial community and a natural planktonic community, we have shown that we can accurately reveal previously unseen dynamical regimes in these systems.

We have also developed ways to predict changes in **community composition** (i.e., which species will persist) under press disturbances. To do so, we have relied on the concept of **structural stability**, which captures the capacity of a community to maintain its composition under changes in the parameters of a population dynamics model (e.g., Lotka-Volterra model). By measuring the structural stability of all species subsets that can emerge from a species pool, we have shown that the subsets most likely to be assembled are those that can tolerate a larger range of press disturbances ([Medeiros *et al* 2021 *American Naturalist*](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/711663)). This prediction has been confirmed using data on natural communities of herbivorous insects. We have also developed a theoretical framework that connects the response of a community to pulse disturbances and its response to press disturbances ([Medeiros *et al* 2021 *Journal of Animal Ecology*](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1365-2656.13421)). This framework allows us to obtain additional information about how a community should respond to perturbations by measuring a single metric from data.
